# Labor-Market-Employment-Analysis

## Introduction
Job insecurity is a frightening reality in the current labor market. The ability to predict an individual’s employment status would be a valuable tool for identifying persons most at risk of experiencing job insecurity. The goal of this project is to analyze and train a logistic regression model to predict the employment status of an individual. The training data provided for the model is a real-world labor market dataset, which will allow us to explore employment trends through various potential predicting factors such as age, education level, income, work experience, and industry type. 

The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics releases monthly updates to the national unemployment rate, which they calculate using a combination of Household survey data and Establishment survey data. The current rate of unemployment nationally is estimated to be 4.1% (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 2025). While these reports offer valuable insights into the overall health of the labor market, the figure is less useful for analyzing the correlations between rate of unemployment and more individualized working conditions. By analyzing the coefficients in our model we will also be able to assess the impact of individual characteristics on predicting unemployment status as well as potential interactions between factors. 

## Descriptive Analysis
The dataset consists of 300 observations, each representing an individual in the labor market. Below are the variables in our dataset:
* Age (numeric): Age of the individual
* Education_Years (numeric): Total number of years of education completed
* Gender (categorical): Gender of the individual (Male or Female)
* Work_Experience (numeric): Total years of work experience
* Industry_Type (categorical): Industry sector of employment (e.g., Manufacturing, Technology, Healthcare, Education, Retail)
* Union_Membership (binary): Whether the individual is a member of a labor union (1 = Yes, 0 = No)
* Population_Density (numeric): Population density of the individual’s residential area (people per square mile)
* Income_Level (numeric): Annual income in USD
* Currently_Employed (binary, outcome variable): Whether the individual is currently employed (1 = Yes, 0 = No)

Before beginning our analysis, we performed several data cleaning steps to make sure that our dataset is consistent. After importing our dataset and outputting the first few rows, we noticed that there were some missing values. To avoid potential biases, we decided to remove all the rows that have missing values. We then converted the categorical variables to factors to make sure the statistical models can properly recognize and process these variables. We also decided to check for duplicate rows in our dataset, as it would cause inconsistencies, though none were found.

### Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)
We constructed boxplots for the numeric variables to observe any outliers. Then, we plotted the categorical variables via bar plots to see if there were any discrepancies. The Gender Distribution graph reveals a higher representation of females compared to males. The Industry Type Distribution bar graph seems to have a relatively even distribution across multiple industries. Additionally, the Union Membership Distribution graph indicates that a significant number of individuals in this dataset are not affiliated with a union. From the Current Employed Distribution graph, we can see that the majority of individuals in the dataset are currently employed. We chose to plot the categorical variables against `Currently_Employed` (our outcome variable) to better visualize and understand their relationship. The Currently Employed by Gender graph displays the relationship between `Gender` and `Currently_Employed`. `Currently_Employed` appears to be relatively balanced across both genders but a higher proportion of females are currently employed compared to males, while a larger proportion of males are unemployed. The Industry Type By Currently Employed graph shows the distribution between `Currently_Employed` and `Industry_Type`. Employment rates seem to be relatively high across all industries, with the Technology industry having the highest number of employed individuals. On the other hand, the Manufacturing industry appears to have the lowest proportion of employed individuals. The Currently Employed by Union Membership graph showcases the relationship `Union_Membership` and `Currently_Employed`. We noticed that most individuals in the dataset are not members of a union. However, individuals that are part of a union have a higher likelihood of being employed compared to those who are not. 

### Initial Assumptions
We conducted linearity assumption checks on our dataset to make sure that we are not violating the underlying assumptions before proceeding with model building. We did these for all of the numeric variables (`Age`, `Education_Years`, `Work_Experience`, `Population_Density`, and `Income_Level`) with the logit of the probability of `Currently_Employed` to see if we need to use any quadratic terms. An example of our linearity assumption graphs is demonstrated in the Employment Status Probability vs Age graph. It shows a scatterplot of the age of each individual versus the logit of the predicted probability of `Current_Employment`, taken from the main effects model. To address the non-linearity, we can add polynomial terms or using age categories in the model. Following the same format for the rest of the numeric variables, we found that `Age`, `Work_Experience`, and `Income_Level` may require higher order terms.  

We also conducted linearity assumption checks between categorical variables and numerical variables with the logit of the probability of `Currently_Employed` to determine if there are any interaction terms that we should consider for our logistic regression model. For instance, the Employment Status vs Education Years by Industry Type graph shows the `Education_Years` of each individual versus the logit of the predicted probability of `Currently_Employed`, taken from the main effects model. Some of the industries (Education, Healthcare, Manufacturing, and Retail) have much lower logit values. The trends for those industries are slightly curved, which indicates that interaction terms might be needed for the logistic regression model. After creating linearity assumption graphs between the categorical and numerical variables in our dataset, the notable interaction terms we found were: `Gender` and `Age`;  `Industry_Type` and `Age`; `Gender` and `Education_Years`; `Industry_Type` and `Education_Years`; `Industry_Type` and `Work_Experience`; `Industry_Type` and `Population_Density`; `Population_Density` and `Union_Membership`; and `Income_Level` and `Industry_Type`. 

## Results
After evaluating the model, the second model (Currently_Employed ~ Income_Level) resulted to be the superior model for predicting employment status. We obtained a coefficient of 2.316e-05 from our model and a P-value of p = 0.00636 < 0.05 which suggests that income level is a strong predictor of employment status.  Since it is positive it suggests that the likelihood of being employed increases as income level increases.  For every $1 increase in Income Level, the odds of being employed increase by e(2.316e−05) or 0.002316%. Our model suggests that higher income individuals are more likely to be employed. Even though our coefficient is small at 2.316e-05, it was still significant as it allowed our model to pass the global Walds test. We used Pearson residuals while checking for goodness of fit as a way to check validity of the model. From the plot of residuals, although we see a downwards trend, the majority of residuals and the fitted line stay relatively constant at about 0 which is a good indicator of linearity.  

## Conclusions and Limitations
One limitation of this study is that the dataset does not appear to be entirely representative of the general population. For example, the The distribution of employment within this sample is about double the current rate of unemployment in the US at 8.33% (vs. the current 4.0%). Union membership is double the national average at 20.33% (compared to the national average of 9.9% in 2024). These discrepancies indicate that because the sample may not accurately portray the national treads, it could potentially skew the results of this analysis. Although gender and industry type are split fairly evenly and industry type are split fairly evenly, the weak correlations between any two numeric variables, with the highest being a correlation coefficient of 0.16, showcase limited predictive power within the dataset. 

Another limitation we noticed that was while our model passed the global Wald test, residual vs numeric, and Pearson residual vs income level, in the Pearson residual plot we notice a clear downward trend especially at the higher income level. This suggests that our model is insufficient at predicting the probability of employment. After attempting logarithmic transformation and squaring, the model did not improve. Normally, to improve this type of discrepancy, it is recommended to add interaction terms, but as we saw previously, adding more terms causes our model to fail the global Wald test, leaving us with this limitation. 

In our final model, using Income Level as the sole predictor for Current Employment, we found that a lower reported annual income correlated with a higher likelihood of unemployment. The first thought on drawing this conclusion would be that individuals who aren't making any money, those who are unemployed, have a higher likelihood of reporting a lower income purely because they are reporting they have no income. Mark B. Stewart, Professor of Economics at the University of Warwick, in a study assessing the dynamics of unemployment and low-wage employment, found that "low-wage jobs act as the main conduit for repeat unemployment. Those who get a better job reduce the increased risk of repeat unemployment to insignificance. The probability of re-entering unemployment for someone who gets a low-wage job after a spell of unemployment is three times as great as that for someone with the same observed and unobserved characteristics originally in employment." (Stewart, M.B. (2007). This suggests that there is some practical significance to the model, however, a more specialized study would be required to assess a clear correlation between low wages and repeat unemployment. The greatly increased likelihood of remaining employed at higher income levels would also explain the extreme residual values observed at higher income levels. 





 
